# Benchmark

XspecT is a tool designed for fast and accurate species classification of genome assemblies and simulated reads. To evaluate its classification accuracy, we conducted a benchmark using a set of Acinetobacter genomes.

The benchmark was performed by first downloading all available Acinetobacter genomes from RefSeq, filtered on a passed ("OK") taxonomy check status. Genomes assigned to strain IDs were remapped to their respective species IDs, after which genomes with species IDs not contained in XspecT's Acinetobacter model were removed. The remaining genomes were then used to classify both assemblies and simulated reads generated from them. Simulated reads were generated by first filtering on genomes that were not part of the training data and that were categorized as "complete" or "chromosome" by NCBI. The reads were then simulated from the longest contig of each genome (assumed to be the chromosome) using ART. Up to three genomes were selected per species. 100 000 reads were simulated for each genome based on the HiSeq 2500 profile, with a read length of 125 bp. The reads were then classified using XspecT with predictions based on the maximum-scoring species.

## Benchmark Results

The benchmark results show that XspecT achieves high classification accuracy, with an overall accuracy of nearly 100% for whole genomes and 78% for simulated reads. However, the low macro-average F1 score (0.24) for the read dataset highlights a substantial class imbalance.

| Dataset   | Total Samples | Matches   | Mismatches | Match Rate | Mismatch Rate | Accuracy | Macro Avg F1 | Weighted Avg F1 |
|-----------|--------------:|----------:|-----------:|-----------:|--------------:|---------:|-------------:|----------------:|
| Assembly  | 44,905        | 44,879    | 26         | 99.94%     | 0.06%         | ≈1.00    | 0.95         | ≈1.00            |
| Reads     | 7,100,052     | 5,562,389 | 1,537,663  | 78.34%     | 21.66%        | 0.78     | 0.24         | 0.84            |

## Running the benchmark yourself

To benchmark XspecT performance yourself, you can use the Nextflow workflow provided in the `scripts/benchmark` directory. This workflow allows you to run XspecT on a set of samples and measure species classification accuracy on both genome assemblies, as well as on simulated reads.

Before you run the benchmark, you first need to download benchmarking data to the `data` directory, for example from NCBI. To do so, you can use the bash script in `scripts/benchmark-data` to download the data using the [NCBI Datasets CLI](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/docs/v2/command-line-tools/download-and-install/), which needs to be installed first. The script will download all available Acinetobacter genomes, as well as taxonomic data.

To run the benchmark, install [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/install.html) and run the following command:

```bash
nextflow run scripts/benchmark
```

This will execute the benchmark workflow, which will classify the samples, as well as reads generated from them, using XspecT. The results will be saved in the `results` directory:

- `results/classifications.tsv` for the classifications of the assemblies
- `results/read_classifications.tsv` for the classifications of the simulated reads
- `results/confusion_matrix.png` for the confusion matrix of genome assembly classifications
- `results/mismatches_confusion_matrix.png` for a confusion matrix filtered on mismatches of genome assembly classifications
- `results/stats.txt` for the statistics of the benchmark run